.. date: 2026-07-04-17-00-00
.. gh-issue: 153030
.. nonce: RovkP6
.. release date: 2026-07-18
.. section: Security

Fixed quadratic complexity in incremental parsing of long unterminated
constructs (such as tags or comments) in :class:`html.parser.HTMLParser`,
which could be exploited for a denial of service.

..

.. date: 2026-06-25-20-44-20
.. gh-issue: 152216
.. nonce: VxiK5y
.. section: Security

Update bundled `libexpat <https://libexpat.github.io/>`_ to version 2.8.2.

..

.. date: 2026-06-23-14-19-30
.. gh-issue: 151987
.. nonce: 8mNIMf
.. section: Security

The :meth:`tarfile.TarFile.extract` method now applies the given filter when
it extracts a link target from the archive as a fallback.

..

.. date: 2026-06-23-13-28-16
.. gh-issue: 151981
.. nonce: xBHEcU
.. section: Security

In :mod:`tarfile`, seeking a stream now stops when end of the stream is
reached.

..

.. date: 2026-06-10-13-08-19
.. gh-issue: 151558
.. nonce: mL74i2
.. section: Security

Fixed an vulnerability in the :mod:`tarfile` ``data`` and ``tar`` extraction
filters where crafted archives could create a symlink pointing outside the
destination directory. This was a bypass of :cve:`2025-4330`.

..

.. date: 2026-05-30-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 150743
.. nonce: httpdos
.. section: Security

:mod:`http.client` now limits the number of chunked-response trailer lines
it will read to :attr:`~http.client.HTTPConnection.max_response_headers`
(100 by default), and the number of interim (1xx) responses it will skip to
100.  A malicious or broken server could previously stream trailer lines or
``100 Continue`` responses forever, hanging the client even when a socket
timeout was in use. Reported by ``@YLChen-007`` via GHSA-w4q2-g22w-6fr4.

..

.. date: 2026-01-16-11-58-19
.. gh-issue: 143927
.. nonce: aviFeG
.. section: Security

Normalize all line endings (CR, CRLF, and LF) to LF+TAB when writing
multi-line configparser values.

..

.. date: 2026-07-08-13-23-11
.. gh-issue: 153298
.. nonce: wvcXxN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixes a data race in :class:`types.GenericAlias` ``__parameters__``
initialization on free-threading builds.

..

.. date: 2026-07-07-04-16-48
.. gh-issue: 153205
.. nonce: 5fE8QZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a potential :exc:`SystemError` during vector calls when memory
allocation fails. A :exc:`MemoryError` is now raised instead.

..

.. date: 2026-06-30-14-00-00
.. gh-issue: 152682
.. nonce: yId7e5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix NULL pointer dereference in :func:`compile` when a reserved name (e.g.
``__classdict__``) is used as a type parameter name and memory allocation
fails while formatting the error message.

..

.. date: 2026-06-29-23-29-14
.. gh-issue: 152635
.. nonce: O21J0O
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash caused when running out of memory creating a
:mod:`!_interpchannels` channel. Now a :exc:`MemoryError` is correctly
raised.

..

.. date: 2026-06-28-14-39-05
.. gh-issue: 152405
.. nonce: -_3YRo
.. section: Core and Builtins

Do not expose the internal mapping of :class:`types.MappingProxyType` when
performing rich-compare operations with non-stdlib types. Previously, it was
possible to mutate the internal mapping of a proxy there. Now we pass not
the original :class:`dict` instance, but its copy, when dealing with custom
types.

..

.. date: 2026-06-28-14-31-03
.. gh-issue: 152492
.. nonce: _09Zee
.. section: Core and Builtins

:type:`collections.OrderedDict` ``update`` method can now accept
:type:`frozendict` as an argument.

..

.. date: 2026-06-27-10-05-12
.. gh-issue: 152375
.. nonce: L-ZBk6
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix undefined behaviour when a :mod:`sys.monitoring` callback raised an
exception while the program was following a branch or loop.

..

.. date: 2026-06-26-22-03-16
.. gh-issue: 152235
.. nonce: ZKWiWk
.. section: Core and Builtins

Defer GC tracking of :meth:`set.intersection`, :meth:`set.difference`,
:meth:`set.symmetric_difference`, :meth:`set.union` and ``set.__sub__``.
Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2026-06-26-05-49-13
.. gh-issue: 152235
.. nonce: YU20T9
.. section: Core and Builtins

Defer GC tracking of a :class:`set` or :class:`frozenset` to the end of its
construction from iterable. Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2026-06-25-21-34-15
.. gh-issue: 152228
.. nonce: a6K14K
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an assertion failure when python is built in a debug mode that happened
in :meth:`str.replace` under a limited memory situation.

..

.. date: 2026-06-24-13-36-31
.. gh-issue: 151722
.. nonce: lWKfE1
.. section: Core and Builtins

:meth:`!frozendict.fromkeys` now only tracks the :class:`frozendict` in the
garbage collector once the dictionary is fully initialized. Patch by Donghee
Na and Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-06-23-23-48-54
.. gh-issue: 151763
.. nonce: Eu8pYQ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixes possible crash on :class:`types.CodeType` deallocation.

..

.. date: 2026-06-23-19-50-22
.. gh-issue: 152020
.. nonce: DTKXjR
.. section: Core and Builtins

On the free-threaded build, :func:`asyncio.all_tasks` no longer loses
eager-started tasks when called from a thread other than the one running the
event loop.

..

.. date: 2026-06-23-12-03-55
.. gh-issue: 151763
.. nonce: K7QfWG
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a potential crash in :func:`compile`, :func:`exec`, :func:`eval` and
:func:`ast.parse` when an allocation fails: the parser or compiler could
return without setting an exception.

..

.. date: 2026-06-22-14-48-22
.. gh-issue: 151912
.. nonce: YcxfnU
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed a crash in ``type()`` when selecting a metaclass whose ``tp_new`` slot
is ``NULL``. Such metaclasses are now rejected with ``TypeError`` instead of
causing a NULL pointer dereference.

..

.. date: 2026-06-21-16-00-00
.. gh-issue: 151773
.. nonce: mN4kRt
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash in :func:`contextvars.ContextVar.set` when memory allocation
fails.

..

.. date: 2026-06-20-10-01-26
.. gh-issue: 151672
.. nonce: K-w7j0
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an inconsistency where calling ``__lazy_import__`` with a string
``fromlist`` would return a :class:`types.LazyImportType` that resolves to
the named member, rather than the module being imported.

..

.. date: 2026-06-19-16-40-01
.. gh-issue: 151619
.. nonce: 35yyJW
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix an issue where using non-module global or builtin namespaces (such as
dictionaries passed to :func:`exec`) could cause cached global loads to
produce unresolved :ref:`lazy imports <lazy-imports>`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-18-16-00-10
.. gh-issue: 151126
.. nonce: tBqn6I
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a crash when sharing :class:`memoryview` objects between interpreters
fails due to running out of memory. It now raises a proper
:exc:`MemoryError`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-18-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 151644
.. nonce: 5cFffN
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a data race in :func:`sys.setdlopenflags` and :func:`sys.getdlopenflags`
when called concurrently in the free-threaded build. The underlying
``_PyImport_GetDLOpenFlags`` and ``_PyImport_SetDLOpenFlags`` functions now
use atomic load/store operations.

..

.. date: 2026-06-17-16-46-07
.. gh-issue: 151126
.. nonce: vhTL0T
.. section: Core and Builtins

Avoid possible crash in ``_winapi.c`` where a device has no memory left. Now
it properly raises a :exc:`MemoryError`. Patch by Ivy Xu.

..

.. date: 2026-06-06-20-15-08
.. gh-issue: 151029
.. nonce: A33CKK
.. section: Core and Builtins

On Linux, fix :func:`sys.remote_exec` unable to find remote writable memory
when ``libpython`` replaced on disk.

..

.. date: 2026-06-03-21-14-28
.. gh-issue: 150459
.. nonce: qpsCEl
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix :exc:`SyntaxError` error message for ``from x lazy import y``. Raise
:exc:`SyntaxWarning` on ``from . lazy import x`` (with whitespace between
the dots and a module named ``lazy``).

..

.. date: 2026-06-03-16-27-00
.. gh-issue: 150858
.. nonce: j2dSkD
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a data race while changing ``__qualname__`` of a type concurrently on
free-threaded builds.

..

.. date: 2026-05-29-17-51-11
.. gh-issue: 144774
.. nonce: jPcixe
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix data race in :class:`BaseException` when an exception is copied while
being mutated.

..

.. date: 2026-05-26-00-06-30
.. gh-issue: 150411
.. nonce: u-d-_5
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a data race in the free-threaded build when :func:`gc.get_count` reads
the young generation allocation count while another thread updates it.

..

.. date: 2026-05-11-15-58-23
.. gh-issue: 149689
.. nonce: 9Ht49z
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix missing error propagation in parser action helpers when memory
allocation fails. Patch by Thomas Kowalski.

..

.. date: 2026-04-29-15-10-59
.. gh-issue: 149162
.. nonce: BPPyrq
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix a potential deadlock in :c:func:`PyUnicode_InternFromString` and other
interning functions in the :term:`free-threaded build` when called from C++
static local initializers.

..

.. date: 2026-04-21-15-07-03
.. gh-issue: 148825
.. nonce: AbJzmZ
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fix build error if specialization is disabled.

..

.. date: 2026-07-14-19-45-21
.. gh-issue: 153695
.. nonce: UYdZJZ
.. section: Library

Hashing a :class:`sqlite3.Row` that contains an unhashable value now raises
:exc:`TypeError` instead of :exc:`SystemError`. Patch by tonghuaroot.

..

.. date: 2026-07-13-10-27-08
.. gh-issue: 153658
.. nonce: A6o4n5
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`sqlite3.Connection.iterdump` raising
:exc:`sqlite3.OperationalError` when a table name contains a single quote.
Patch by tonghuaroot.

..

.. date: 2026-07-12-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 85943
.. nonce: 8f906e
.. section: Library

Fix :mod:`struct` functions raising :exc:`BytesWarning` under the ``-bb``
command line option when a :class:`str` format is used after an equal
:class:`bytes` format (or vice versa).  The internal format cache no longer
mixes :class:`str` and :class:`bytes` keys.

..

.. date: 2026-07-09-15-18-23
.. gh-issue: 151292
.. nonce: f4NQSW
.. section: Library

Store the sample count in :mod:`profiling.sampling` binary format, as a
64-bit integer, widening from previously used 32-bit integer. This breaks
the existing recordings. Long or thread-heavy profiling sessions will no
longer fail because of :exc:`OverflowError`. Patch by Maurycy
Pawłowski-Wieroński.

..

.. date: 2026-07-09-14-00-00
.. gh-issue: 153417
.. nonce: Bw7Rq2
.. section: Library

Error messages from :meth:`imaplib.IMAP4.select` and
:meth:`imaplib.IMAP4.uid` no longer raise :exc:`BytesWarning` under
:option:`!-bb` when the mailbox or command argument is :class:`bytes`.

..

.. date: 2026-07-09-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 153406
.. nonce: vyMmB6
.. section: Library

:func:`email.utils.parsedate_to_datetime` now raises :exc:`ValueError`
instead of :exc:`OverflowError` when the parsed year or timezone offset is
out of range, matching its documented behavior.

..

.. date: 2026-07-08-21-15-00
.. gh-issue: 153333
.. nonce: Kp3mZq
.. section: Library

The ``readprofile`` method of :class:`tkinter.Tk` now reads the user's
profile scripts using the encoding declared in the file, instead of the
locale encoding.

..

.. date: 2026-07-08-01-47-15
.. gh-issue: 153083
.. nonce: XbKZCp
.. section: Library

Defer GC tracking of an :class:`array.array` to the end of its construction.
Patch by Donghee Na.

..

.. date: 2026-07-08-01-03-17
.. gh-issue: 153292
.. nonce: oHDt3l
.. section: Library

Fix data race in repr of :class:`threading.RLock` in free-threading build.

..

.. date: 2026-07-07-22-06-52
.. gh-issue: 153293
.. nonce: 0DvYdc
.. section: Library

Fix the live sampling profiler TUI keeping stale aggregated opcode
statistics after a stats reset.

..

.. date: 2026-07-07-17-50-54
.. gh-issue: 143990
.. nonce: FoNtCf
.. section: Library

A :class:`tkinter.font.Font` created from a named font, including by
:meth:`~tkinter.font.Font.copy`, now copies its configured options rather
than the options resolved by Tcl's ``font actual``, preserving a size
specified in pixels (a negative size).

..

.. date: 2026-07-07-13-31-52
.. gh-issue: 148286
.. nonce: -qu-em
.. section: Library

Fix undefined behavior in
:attr:`compression.zstd.ZstdDecompressor.unused_data` when a complete frame
was decompressed in a single call.

..

.. date: 2026-07-07-02-26-43
.. gh-issue: 153210
.. nonce: LUXIcm
.. section: Library

Fix crash on :mod:`array` import under a memory pressure.

..

.. date: 2026-07-06-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 153200
.. nonce: isqrtLt
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`math.isqrt` returning an incorrect result for arguments not less
than 2**64 that are instances of an :class:`int` subclass with an overridden
comparison operator.

..

.. date: 2026-07-05-16-09-31
.. gh-issue: 153068
.. nonce: huY9Jh
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`!cProfile.Profile.enable` to no longer overwrite errors from
:mod:`sys.monitoring`.

..

.. date: 2026-07-05-14-30-00
.. gh-issue: 153062
.. nonce: teeFT1
.. section: Library

Fix a crash when concurrently iterating an :func:`itertools.tee` iterator on
the free-threaded build.

..

.. date: 2026-07-05-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 153056
.. nonce: tMpLat
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`string.Template` raising a spurious :exc:`ValueError` when the
*pattern* attribute is a compiled regular expression object, which the
documentation allows.  On the free-threaded build this also occurred as a
data race on the first concurrent use.

..

.. date: 2026-07-05-10-24-30
.. gh-issue: 143921
.. nonce: wQx3Tn
.. section: Library

Narrow the control character check in :mod:`imaplib` commands: only NUL, CR
and LF are now rejected. Other control characters are valid in quoted
strings and can occur in mailbox names returned by the server, so they are
now accepted and sent quoted.

..

.. date: 2026-07-04-20-28-51
.. gh-issue: 153037
.. nonce: XUSp_g
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`~compression.zstd.ZstdFile` raising :exc:`AttributeError`
instead of :exc:`io.UnsupportedOperation` when iterating over a file that is
not open for reading.

..

.. date: 2026-07-04-13-00-00
.. gh-issue: 135661
.. nonce: CIkADG
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`html.parser.HTMLParser`: an abruptly closed empty comment
(``<!-->`` or ``<!--->``) no longer extends up to a later ``-->`` in the
same :meth:`~html.parser.HTMLParser.feed` call.

..

.. date: 2026-07-04-11-14-06
.. gh-issue: 152851
.. nonce: diYvTf
.. section: Library

Prevent a crash when allocation fails while copying a :func:`BLAKE-2s/2b
<hashlib.blake2b>` object. Patch by Bénédikt Tran.

..

.. date: 2026-07-03-21-10-00
.. gh-issue: 54930
.. nonce: hq09Er
.. section: Library

Error responses of :class:`http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler` to malformed
request lines now include a status line and headers instead of being sent in
the bare HTTP/0.9 style. Only a valid HTTP/0.9 request (a two-word ``GET``
request line) now receives an HTTP/0.9 style response.

..

.. date: 2026-07-03-18-30-00
.. gh-issue: 119592
.. nonce: mQr3Vx
.. section: Library

Fix :class:`concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` stranding submitted work
forever when a worker process exited upon reaching its *max_tasks_per_child*
limit after :meth:`~concurrent.futures.Executor.shutdown` was called with
``wait=False``: a replacement worker is now spawned and the remaining work
executed as documented. If the executor has instead been garbage collected
without ``shutdown()`` (:gh:`152967`), or a replacement worker cannot be
started, the remaining futures now fail with
:exc:`~concurrent.futures.process.BrokenProcessPool` instead of never
resolving. A worker exit racing ``shutdown(wait=False)`` can also no longer
crash the executor management thread.

..

.. date: 2026-07-03-17-29-34
.. gh-issue: 150579
.. nonce: 0tLpQukIU
.. section: Library

:mod:`concurrent.futures` now uses lazy imports for its executor submodules
instead of a module ``__getattr__`` hook.

..

.. date: 2026-07-03-14-54-33
.. gh-issue: 152951
.. nonce: u8tPCI
.. section: Library

:class:`collections.deque` prevent rare crash when calling ``extend`` under
high memory pressure conditions.

..

.. date: 2026-07-02-22-19-53
.. gh-issue: 150880
.. nonce: vPZ7jK
.. section: Library

Normalize non-extended Windows paths before appending the wildcard used by
``os.listdir()`` and ``os.scandir()``, making paths with trailing spaces
behave consistently with other filesystem APIs.

..

.. date: 2026-07-02-19-21-15
.. gh-issue: 152068
.. nonce: ThsmJU
.. section: Library

Fixes a bug when a line was split (particularly on macOS Terminal.app) in
the middle of a colorized keyword, causing the ANSI Color Reset sequence
(ESC0m) to not be properly printed, causing the output to be colored when it
shouldn't

..

.. date: 2026-07-02-13-30-00
.. gh-issue: 152849
.. nonce: K9dRvP
.. section: Library

Out-of-range float and integer timestamps now raise :exc:`OverflowError`
with the same message. Patch by tonghuaroot.

..

.. date: 2026-07-02-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 152847
.. nonce: PitKqc
.. section: Library

Reject a POSIX TZ transition rule with non-digit characters in the
day-of-year field in the pure-Python :mod:`zoneinfo` parser. Patch by
tonghuaroot.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 152718
.. nonce: pr0f1l
.. section: Library

Fix unbounded memory allocation in the :mod:`profiling.sampling` binary
profile reader when a file declares more string or frame entries than it
contains.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 108280
.. nonce: Nq8vTr
.. section: Library

Connecting :mod:`imaplib` to a server that does not send a valid IMAP4
greeting (for example a POP3 server answering on the IMAP port) now raises
an error reporting the server's response instead of ``imaplib.IMAP4.error:
None``.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-10-30-00
.. gh-issue: 63121
.. nonce: Rm4tZp
.. section: Library

:mod:`imaplib` now refreshes the cached capability list after a successful
:meth:`~imaplib.IMAP4.login` or :meth:`~imaplib.IMAP4.authenticate`, using
the ``CAPABILITY`` response sent by the server or, if none was sent, by
querying it, so that capabilities that become available only after
authentication (such as ``ENABLE`` on Gmail) are recognized.  Capabilities
advertised in the server greeting are now also used, avoiding a redundant
``CAPABILITY`` command.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-10-00-00
.. gh-issue: 88574
.. nonce: Kz3wQm
.. section: Library

:mod:`imaplib` no longer fails when a server sends a spurious blank line
after the counted data of a literal, including after a literal that
terminates a response (such as a mailbox name returned by ``LIST``). Such
blank lines are now skipped without swallowing the following line.

..

.. date: 2026-06-30-21-40-00
.. gh-issue: 152502
.. nonce: Kq3Vn7
.. section: Library

Detect the :mod:`curses` mouse interface (:func:`~curses.getmouse`, the
``BUTTON*`` constants, and others) with a configure capability probe or
library macros instead of gating it on ncurses-specific macros.  It is now
also available with other curses implementations that provide it, such as
NetBSD curses and PDCurses (the latter underpins ``windows-curses``).

..

.. date: 2026-06-30-13-00-00
.. gh-issue: 151842
.. nonce: OOM31g
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in :func:`!_interpreters.capture_exception` when
:exc:`MemoryError` happens. Patch by Amrutha Modela.

..

.. date: 2026-06-30-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 40038
.. nonce: qK7mGv
.. section: Library

:mod:`imaplib` now again quotes command arguments when necessary, for
example mailbox names containing a space.  Such quoting was inadvertently
disabled when the module was ported to Python 3, and the arguments are now
quoted according to the :rfc:`3501` grammar.  For backward compatibility, an
argument already enclosed in double quotes is left unchanged, so code that
quotes arguments itself keeps working.

..

.. date: 2026-06-29-22-16-57
.. gh-issue: 50966
.. nonce: Tq5mLp
.. section: Library

Fix unbounded recursion in :mod:`turtle` when a mouse event handler that
moves the turtle is reentered while the screen is being redrawn, for example
with ``screen.ondrag(turtle.goto)``.  This could previously crash the
interpreter.

..

.. date: 2026-06-29-09-45-00
.. gh-issue: 152569
.. nonce: Kf7Lq2
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`asyncio.wait` leaking waiting tasks via the await-graph when
racing a future that never resolves. The waiting task is now discarded from
every future's ``awaited_by`` set once :func:`~asyncio.wait` returns, even
for pending futures.

..

.. date: 2026-06-29-01-08-53
.. gh-issue: 110357
.. nonce: QGWdZQ
.. section: Library

Importing :mod:`hashlib` no longer logs an error to stderr when a normally
guaranteed hash algorithm is unavailable in the current runtime (for example
under an OpenSSL FIPS configuration or a build using
:option:`--without-builtin-hashlib-hashes <--with-builtin-hashlib-hashes>`).
Code that actually uses the missing algorithm still gets a clear
:exc:`ValueError`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-28-12-45-09
.. gh-issue: 152356
.. nonce: Dr4w2Q
.. section: Library

Fix a hang in ``profiling.sampling run --blocking`` on Windows when the
target process exits. The profiler now finalizes binary profiles instead of
continuing to sample the exited process.

..

.. date: 2026-06-28-11-00-40
.. gh-issue: 78335
.. nonce: Kp3mWq
.. section: Library

Update the docstrings of :mod:`tkinter` and :mod:`tkinter.ttk` widget
classes to list all supported widget options, including options added in Tk
9.0 and 9.1.  ``tkinter.Menubutton`` and ``tkinter.Message`` previously had
no option list at all.

..

.. date: 2026-06-27-17-19-09
.. gh-issue: 151126
.. nonce: huUyOM
.. section: Library

Fix two crashes in :mod:`tkinter` and :mod:`socket` modules initialization
under a memory pressure. Sets missing :exc:`MemoryError`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-27-12-30-00
.. gh-issue: 133031
.. nonce: Na8Bit
.. section: Library

:class:`curses.textpad.Textbox` now enters and reads back the non-ASCII
characters of an 8-bit locale encoding, instead of mangling them with a
7-bit mask.

..

.. date: 2026-06-26-23-56-40
.. gh-issue: 71880
.. nonce: 782D31
.. section: Library

:class:`curses.textpad.Textbox` now lets the lower-right cell of the window
be edited.  Writing it with :meth:`~curses.window.addch` would move the
cursor past the end of the window, raising an error and scrolling a
scrollable window, so it is now written with :meth:`~curses.window.insch`,
which keeps the cursor in place.

..

.. date: 2026-06-26-16-30-00
.. gh-issue: 83274
.. nonce: Kx9mQv
.. section: Library

Deallocating a :mod:`tkinter` application from a thread other than the one
it was created in no longer crashes the interpreter.  The underlying Tcl
interpreter is leaked instead, and a :exc:`RuntimeWarning` is reported.

..

.. date: 2026-06-26-15-41-34
.. gh-issue: 152305
.. nonce: WnbbBc
.. section: Library

Fix the pure-Python :meth:`datetime.time.strftime` implementation raising
:exc:`AttributeError` for the year directives. Patch by tonghuaroot.

..

.. date: 2026-06-26-15-30-00
.. gh-issue: 88758
.. nonce: Qw7nLp
.. section: Library

:meth:`!tkinter.Misc.focus_get`, :meth:`!focus_displayof`,
:meth:`!focus_lastfor` and :meth:`!winfo_containing` now return ``None``
instead of raising :exc:`KeyError` when the widget was not created by
:mod:`tkinter` (for example a torn-off menu).

..

.. date: 2026-06-26-15-00-00
.. gh-issue: 38464
.. nonce: yDPjKH
.. section: Library

:meth:`!tkinter.Misc.nametowidget` now resolves the auto-generated names of
cloned menus (a menu used as a menubar or a cascade) back to the original
widget.

..

.. date: 2026-06-26-13-39-11
.. gh-issue: 152248
.. nonce: N2Rmaf
.. section: Library

Make the C and pure-Python :mod:`zoneinfo` parsers validate POSIX TZ
abbreviations consistently, rejecting unquoted abbreviations with non-letter
characters and empty quoted abbreviations. Patch by tonghuaroot.

..

.. date: 2026-06-26-13-10-00
.. gh-issue: 80937
.. nonce: Hq3mNp
.. section: Library

Fix a memory leak in :mod:`tkinter` when a Tcl command created with
``createcommand`` was not explicitly removed before the interpreter was
deleted.  The command no longer keeps the interpreter alive through a
reference cycle.

..

.. date: 2026-06-26-12-50-26
.. gh-issue: 152246
.. nonce: MfXMd1
.. section: Library

Fix the pure-Python :mod:`zoneinfo` parser accepting an invalid POSIX TZ
transition rule with a non-period separator. Patch by tonghuaroot.

..

.. date: 2026-06-25-20-00-00
.. gh-issue: 151496
.. nonce: kMnT3x
.. section: Library

Fixed ``profiling.sampling --gecko`` with ``--async-aware`` by flattening
async task stacks before generating Gecko samples. ``--binary`` now rejects
``--async-aware`` until the binary format supports async task data.

..

.. date: 2026-06-25-14-32-43
.. gh-issue: 139816
.. nonce: Lq2vXa
.. section: Library

Fix a hang in :mod:`tkinter` on interactive Python built without
:mod:`readline`.  An exception raised in a callback no longer causes the
event loop to stop and wait for the user to press Enter; pending callbacks
now keep running until input is actually available on stdin.

..

.. date: 2026-06-25-14-32-42
.. gh-issue: 139145
.. nonce: kT9rmP
.. section: Library

Fix a busy loop in :mod:`tkinter` on interactive Python.  When a Tcl command
running its own event loop (such as ``vwait`` or :meth:`!wait_variable`) was
active and input arrived on stdin, the event loop kept spinning at 100% CPU.
The stdin file handler is now removed as soon as input is available.  Based
on a patch by Michiel de Hoon.

..

.. date: 2026-06-25-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 152212
.. nonce: Zk7Qm2
.. section: Library

Fix the pure-Python :mod:`zoneinfo` parser accepting a POSIX TZ string with
a ``std`` abbreviation but no offset. This is invalid per POSIX and now
raises :exc:`ValueError`, matching the C accelerator. Patch by tonghuaroot.

..

.. date: 2026-06-25-10-07-54
.. gh-issue: 152156
.. nonce: gscPU9
.. section: Library

Fix a possible crash in :func:`concurrent.interpreters.create` under limited
memory conditions.

..

.. date: 2026-06-25-07-08-17
.. gh-issue: 152157
.. nonce: dt5Ef0
.. section: Library

The C implementations of :meth:`~datetime.datetime.fromisoformat` and
:meth:`~datetime.time.fromisoformat` now reject a decimal separator that is
not followed by any fractional digit before a timezone designator.

..

.. date: 2026-06-25-01-00-43
.. gh-issue: 151763
.. nonce: wWeHBe
.. section: Library

Fix crash in :func:`!_interpqueues.create` whe :exc:`MemoryError` happens on
queue creation.

..

.. date: 2026-06-24-23-28-42
.. gh-issue: 151669
.. nonce: tPUavQ
.. section: Library

On Windows, when populating tar archives from filesystem content, to conform
to the tar format standard, backslashes in symlink targets are be replaced
by slashes.

..

.. date: 2026-06-24-22-16-35
.. gh-issue: 105895
.. nonce: hRkuEw
.. section: Library

Add :keyword:`match` and :keyword:`case` to the list of supported topics by
:func:`help`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-24-16-40-15
.. gh-issue: 151378
.. nonce: iYWa_6
.. section: Library

Fix a bug in the binary collector in Tachyon that caused unbounded memory
growth while profiling a thread that stayed asleep. Patch by Maurycy
Pawłowski-Wieroński.

..

.. date: 2026-06-24-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 152079
.. nonce: f1tzus
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`datetime.datetime.fromisoformat` in the C implementation dropping
the sub-second part of a UTC offset whose whole-second part is zero,
matching the pure-Python implementation.

..

.. date: 2026-06-24-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 152052
.. nonce: yBssDE
.. section: Library

The :mod:`json` C accelerator now correctly reports an unterminated string
for a ``\uXXXX`` escape at the end of the input.

..

.. date: 2026-06-24-10-46-35
.. gh-issue: 152060
.. nonce: f2asrt
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`datetime.datetime.fromisoformat` raising :exc:`AssertionError`
instead of :exc:`ValueError` for some malformed strings in the pure-Python
implementation, matching the C implementation.

..

.. date: 2026-06-23-17-14-04
.. gh-issue: 127802
.. nonce: nGSxo6
.. section: Library

The deprecated :class:`tkinter.Variable` methods :meth:`!trace_variable`,
:meth:`!trace`, :meth:`!trace_vdelete` and :meth:`!trace_vinfo` are now
scheduled for removal in Python 3.17.

..

.. date: 2026-06-23-13-27-14
.. gh-issue: 126219
.. nonce: kOfv2g
.. section: Library

Fixed a crash in :class:`tkinter.Tk` when *className* contains a non-BMP
character and tkinter is built against Tcl/Tk 8.x.  Such a name is now
rejected with a :exc:`ValueError`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-21-15-50-24
.. gh-issue: 86165
.. nonce: dyac1G
.. section: Library

Fix :func:`imaplib.Time2Internaldate` to use the local timezone offset for
``time.struct_time`` values with ``tm_gmtoff`` set to ``None``, as returned
by ``datetime.datetime.timetuple()``. Contributed by Xiao Yuan.

..

.. date: 2026-06-20-21-15-13
.. gh-issue: 151814
.. nonce: OIbgsO
.. section: Library

Fix unbounded memory growth in :class:`io.TextIOWrapper` when repeatedly
writing an empty string.

..

.. date: 2026-06-18-23-59-46
.. gh-issue: 151596
.. nonce: 5ma144
.. section: Library

Add missing ``size`` positional argument to the pure-Python implementation
of :meth:`io.TextIOBase.readline`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-18-12-48-03
.. gh-issue: 151640
.. nonce: R4c3Fx
.. section: Library

Fix a data race in :class:`io.BytesIO` in free-threaded builds when
whole-buffer reads or peeks, or :meth:`~io.BytesIO.getvalue`, share the
internal buffer with concurrent writes.

..

.. date: 2026-06-17-22-31-57
.. gh-issue: 151613
.. nonce: n0nua1
.. section: Library

Fix another way the Tachyon profiler frame cache could produce impossible
mixed stack traces when ``_PyInterpreterFrame`` addresses are reused, by
validating cached frame anchors with a sequence counter.

..

.. date: 2026-06-17-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 148660
.. nonce: odcopy
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in :meth:`!collections.OrderedDict.copy` when a key's ``__eq__``
or a subclass method mutates the dict during the copy.  Now raises
:exc:`RuntimeError` instead, as iteration does.

..

.. date: 2026-06-15-15-32-36
.. gh-issue: 151497
.. nonce: 1cfmSV
.. section: Library

Opening a :mod:`tarfile` archive no longer attempts to pre-allocate a huge
buffer when a crafted or truncated member claims an oversized extended
header (a GNU long name/link or a pax header).  The extended header is now
read in bounded chunks, so its size field can no longer trigger memory
exhaustion.

..

.. date: 2026-06-12-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 151416
.. nonce: spawnUA
.. section: Library

Fix a crash in :func:`os.spawnv` and :func:`os.spawnve` when an *argv*
item's :meth:`~os.PathLike.__fspath__` method mutates the *argv* list during
argument conversion.  :func:`!os.spawnv` argument conversion errors other
than :exc:`TypeError`, such as the :exc:`ValueError` for an embedded null,
are no longer replaced with a generic :exc:`TypeError`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-11-06-56-31
.. gh-issue: 150994
.. nonce: gd1wVw
.. section: Library

Make type annotations in the private ``_colorize`` module resolvable.

..

.. date: 2026-06-06-06-29-17
.. gh-issue: 150994
.. nonce: I2119M
.. section: Library

Make the type annotations in the private ``_colorize`` module resolvable.

..

.. date: 2026-06-03-19-35-32
.. gh-issue: 150583
.. nonce: dedI24
.. section: Library

Correctly set the default compression level in :mod:`compression.zstd` when
passing a digested dictionary during compression.

..

.. date: 2026-05-31-14-39-25
.. gh-issue: 150641
.. nonce: LLIhd1
.. section: Library

Fix bug where :func:`typing.evaluate_forward_ref` with the ``STRING`` format
could leak internal names used by the annotation machinery.

..

.. date: 2026-05-18-12-42-31
.. gh-issue: 149816
.. nonce: F98iME
.. section: Library

Fix a potential use after free condition in :func:`pickle.dumps` in
free-threaded mode when serializing lists.

..

.. date: 2026-03-26-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 47005
.. nonce: xxc89c
.. section: Library

Fix :meth:`!urllib.request.AbstractHTTPHandler.do_open` to give regular
headers set via :meth:`~urllib.request.Request.add_header` priority over
unredirected headers, consistent with
:meth:`~urllib.request.Request.get_header` and
:meth:`~urllib.request.Request.header_items`.

..

.. date: 2026-02-11-16-47-27
.. gh-issue: 140729
.. nonce: 2uTPQp
.. section: Library

Fix a pickling error in the ``cProfile`` module when profiling a script that
uses :class:`multiprocessing.Process` with the ``spawn`` and ``forkserver``
start methods.

..

.. date: 2025-11-02-05-28-56
.. gh-issue: 115634
.. nonce: JbcNnF
.. section: Library

Fix a deadlock in :class:`concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` when using
``max_tasks_per_child``, present since the feature was introduced in Python
3.11. The executor stopped scheduling queued tasks after a worker process
exited upon reaching its task limit. Based on a fix proposed by Tabrez
Mohammed.

..

.. date: 2025-09-05-20-50-35
.. gh-issue: 79638
.. nonce: Y-JfaH
.. section: Library

Disallow all access in :mod:`urllib.robotparser` if the ``robots.txt`` file
is unreachable due to server or network errors.

..

.. date: 2023-06-12-21-31-02
.. gh-issue: 105708
.. nonce: 5fFwP8
.. section: Library

Accept an uppercase V prefix in IPvFuture addresses in
:func:`urllib.parse.urlsplit`.

..

.. date: 2026-06-22-19-45-00
.. gh-issue: 151626
.. nonce: K9pZ2x
.. section: Tests

Fix several tests in ``test.test_inspect``, ``test.test_import``,
``test.test_importlib``, ``test.test_py_compile`` and
``test.test_compileall`` that failed when the test suite was run with
:envvar:`PYTHONPYCACHEPREFIX` set.  These tests now neutralize the pycache
prefix where they assume the default ``__pycache__`` bytecode layout.

..

.. date: 2026-06-16-05-11-38
.. gh-issue: 151096
.. nonce: Kq3Lp9
.. section: Tests

Fix ``test_embed`` failing when CPython is configured with a split exec
prefix (``--exec-prefix`` differing from ``--prefix``).

..

.. date: 2026-07-11-07-26-16
.. gh-issue: 126877
.. nonce: Zt7Kq2
.. section: Build

Fix the :program:`configure` check for Tcl/Tk which could wrongly succeed
with optimizing compilers when the libraries are missing.

..

.. date: 2026-07-09-22-45-00
.. gh-issue: 153438
.. nonce: Qr7N2p
.. section: Build

Update Windows build and installer tooling and documentation to use the
current download URL for ``nuget.exe``.

..

.. date: 2026-07-02-16-25-13
.. gh-issue: 152870
.. nonce: oh9eD1
.. section: Build

Fix a compilation error in the :mod:`decimal` C extension (``_decimal``)
when it is built with ``EXTRA_FUNCTIONALITY``. ``Context.apply()`` called
the internal ``_apply`` helper using its pre-Argument-Clinic signature; the
call is now made through the generated ``_impl`` function.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-17-53-00
.. gh-issue: 152769
.. nonce: Kp7mQ2
.. section: Build

Enable the :ref:`perf profiler <perf_profiling>` trampoline on Alpine Linux
with the musl C library on ``x86_64`` and ``aarch64``. The trampoline is
architecture-specific and does not depend on the C library, so the same
assembly trampoline used for glibc is reused for musl.

..

.. date: 2026-06-28-16-17-55
.. gh-issue: 152502
.. nonce: 6SNqMg
.. section: Build

The :mod:`curses` module now detects ``set_escdelay()``, ``set_tabsize()``
and the ``ESCDELAY`` and ``TABSIZE`` variables with :program:`configure`
capability probes instead of the ncurses-specific ``NCURSES_EXT_FUNCS``
macro, so they are exposed when building against other curses
implementations such as NetBSD curses that provide them.

..

.. date: 2026-04-21-16-07-11
.. gh-issue: 140146
.. nonce: TAcUHA
.. section: Windows

Prevent :mod:`tkinter` from hanging on Windows if stdin is redirected to a
pipe in an interactive session. This is helpful for testing interactive
usage of tkinter from a script, for example as part of the cpython test
suite.

..

.. date: 2026-07-17-23-35-36
.. gh-issue: 124111
.. nonce: dmM4lk
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer to use Tcl/Tk 9.0.4.

..

.. date: 2026-07-17-23-20-27
.. gh-issue: 152023
.. nonce: QAAgdj
.. section: macOS

Update macOS installer builds to SQLite 3.53.3. Enable median() and
percentile() functions.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-19-00-00
.. gh-issue: 82183
.. nonce: rNsTrt
.. section: IDLE

When the shell is busy running code, using "Run... Customized" with "Restart
shell" unchecked now reports that the shell is executing instead of
restarting it anyway.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-18-00-00
.. gh-issue: 83653
.. nonce: cFgInt
.. section: IDLE

Blanking an integer entry in IDLE's Settings dialog, such as "Auto squeeze
min lines", no longer saves an empty string as an invalid configuration
value.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-17-00-00
.. gh-issue: 65339
.. nonce: oUtTxt
.. section: IDLE

Saving the IDLE Shell or an Output window now defaults to a ``.txt``
extension and lists text files before Python files, since their content is
not Python source.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-16-00-00
.. gh-issue: 80504
.. nonce: gReP
.. section: IDLE

The "In files:" field of IDLE's Find in Files dialog now always contains a
full directory path, even for an unsaved editor or the Shell.  This shows in
the grep output which directory was searched.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-15-00-00
.. gh-issue: 134300
.. nonce: iDlPaT
.. section: IDLE

Do not add the ``idlelib`` directory to the path of the IDLE user process.
User code run in IDLE can no longer import ``idlelib`` submodules as
top-level modules, such as ``import help``.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-14-00-00
.. gh-issue: 89360
.. nonce: mUlTiC
.. section: IDLE

Fix a rare crash in the IDLE editor when the completion window is closed:
deleting a key binding for a sequence that is not bound to the virtual event
is now ignored instead of raising a ``ValueError``.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-12-00-00
.. gh-issue: 71956
.. nonce: rPlAlL
.. section: IDLE

Fix Replace All in the IDLE editor's Replace dialog when the search
direction is "Up" and "Wrap around" is off: it now replaces all matches
above the current position instead of only the first one.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-00-15-58
.. gh-issue: 152728
.. nonce: yxIhMN
.. section: IDLE

Move functions run.fix_scaling, editor.fixwordbreaks (as fix_word_breaks)
and pyshell.fix_x11_paste to idlelib.util.

..

.. date: 2026-07-01-00-00-00
.. gh-issue: 66331
.. nonce: wMcLaS
.. section: IDLE

Set the ``WM_CLASS`` window property of IDLE's windows to ``Idle`` on X11,
so that window managers group and label them correctly instead of using the
default ``Toplevel``.

..

.. date: 2026-06-28-06-46-46
.. gh-issue: 85320
.. nonce: Hq2vKn
.. section: IDLE

IDLE now reads and writes its configuration files and the breakpoints file
using UTF-8 instead of the locale encoding.  This keeps non-ASCII data (such
as non-ASCII paths) from being corrupted and makes the files portable
between environments.

..

.. date: 2026-07-09-17-33-29
.. gh-issue: 152132
.. nonce: Ma8MJZ
.. section: C API

Fix :c:func:`Py_RunMain` to return an exit code, rather than calling
:c:func:`Py_Exit`, when running a script, a command, or the REPL. Patch by
Victor Stinner.

..

.. date: 2026-07-09-16-46-30
.. gh-issue: 145633
.. nonce: jyNwAs
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyFloat_Pack8` and ``PyFloat_Unpack*`` functions are no longer
guaranteed to always succeed on CPython.

..

.. date: 2026-07-08-00-38-32
.. gh-issue: 153300
.. nonce: lVoWyR
.. section: C API

:c:func:`PyConfig_Set()` now also set global configuration variables. For
example, ``PyConfig_Set("inspect", value)`` now also sets
:c:var:`Py_InspectFlag`. Patch by Victor Stinner.
